materials/day2/ex8_bin_dereplication.md, before:

# Bin dereplication

### Objectives

* Bin dereplication using `DAS_Tool` - Creating input tables
* Bin dereplication using `DAS_Tool` - Running the tool
* Evaluating bins using `CheckM`

---

### Bin dereplication using `DAS_Tool` - Creating input tables

As we discussed in the previous exercise, we have now generated two sets of bins from the same single assembly. With this mock data set we can see that each tool recovered 10 bins, which is the number of genomes used to create this mock community. Since we **_shouldn't_** see more than 10 bins total, these tools have obviously recovered the same genomes. However, it is not clear which tool has done a better job of recruiting contigs to each bin - we very rarely expect to see the compelte genome recovered from these kinds of data, so while it is probably the case that while an equivalent bin is present in the `MetaBAT` and `MaxBin` outputs, they will probably be of differing quality.

`DAS_Tool` is a program designed to analyse the bins in each of our binning sets and determine where these equivalent pairs (or triplets if we use three binners) exist and return the 'best' one. `DAS_Tool` does not use the actual bins, but a set of text files that link contigs to their corresponding bins in each of the bin sets. We can produce these files using `bash`.

For this exercise, we will continue working in the `5.binning/` directory.

#### Creating contig/bin tables - *MetaBAT*

For each of our binning tools, we need to extract the contigs assigned to each bin and create a single file that reports these as

```bash
Contig[tab]Bin
```

This can be done with a bit of `bash` scripting. There's quite a bit going on here, so we'll provide the full command, and then a step-by-step explanation of what's happening.

```bash
cd 5.binning/

for bin_path in metabat/*.fa;
do
    bin_name=$(basename ${bin_path} .fa)

    grep ">" ${bin_path} | sed 's/>//g' | sed "s/$/\t${bin_name}/g" >> metabat_associations.txt
done
```

You can check the contents of this file using `less` or `head`, and you should be something like:

```bash
head -n5 metabat_associations.txt
# NODE_14_length_365935_cov_2.017800      metabat.10
# NODE_17_length_326226_cov_2.043974      metabat.10
# NODE_22_length_261683_cov_2.059748      metabat.10
# NODE_24_length_257182_cov_2.023572      metabat.10
# NODE_25_length_256074_cov_2.059912      metabat.10
```

We will now walk through the content of the command above, breaking apart each individual step.

```bash
for bin_path in metabat/*.fa;
do
```

This is the initial loop, returning each file in the `metabat/` folder that ends with the file extension *.fa*.

```bash
    bin_name=$(basename ${bin_path} .fa)
```

As we have previously seen, the `basename` command removes the path information from the input variable `bin_path` (i.e. - `metabat/metabat.1.fa` becomes `metabat.1.fa`) and assigns it to a new variable, `bin_name`. As an optional additional parameter, we can pass extra pieces of text to be removed from the variable, in this case the *.fa* extension.

```bash
    grep ">" ${bin_path} | sed 's/>//g' | sed "s/$/\t${bin_name}/g" >> metabat_associations.txt
    |                      |              |                         |
    |                      |              |                         Command 4
    |                      |              Command 3
    |                      Command 2
    Command 1
```

This next step uses piping between several commands to achieve the desired output.

###### Command 1

The `grep` command searches the input file `bin_path` for lines containing the `>` character, which is the *fastA* demarcation for a sequence name.

###### Command 2

The `sed` command replaces the `>` character with the empty character `''`, as we do not need this character in the final file.

###### Command 3

We now use `sed` again, this time to replace the `$` character. In many command line tools and software environments (including `R` and `python`) the characters `^` and `$` are used as shortcuts for the beginning and ending of a line, respectively. By using the character in this way, we are telling `sed` to replace the end-of-line with the text `\t${bin_name}`. `sed` will parse this text to mean the tab character followed by the content of the `bin_name` variable. The nature of `sed` is that it will uatomatically insert a new end-of-line.

###### Command 4

This is similar to the stdout redirection we have previously used, but the double use of the `>` character means that we are appending our text to the end of the file `metabat_associations.txt`. Because we are looping through several files in this exercise, if we were to use the single `>` character then on each new *fastA* file read, the content of `metabat_associations.txt` would be replaced.

It is important to note that because we are **_appending_** to the file, not **_replacing_** the contents, if you make a mistake in the command and need to re-run it, you will need to explicitly delete the `metabat_associations.txt` file using `rm`, otherwise your new (correct) output will be pasted to the end of your old (incorrect) output.

#### Creating contig/bin tables - *MaxBin*

The process for creating the `MaxBin` table is basically the same, we just need to change the file extension, as `MaxBin` writes outputs using the *.fasta* suffix rather than the *.fa* one.

```bash
for bin_path in maxbin/*.fasta;
do
    bin_name=$(basename ${bin_path} .fasta)
    grep ">" ${bin_path} | sed 's/>//g' | sed "s/$/\t${bin_name}/g" >> maxbin_associations.txt
done
```

##### Warning for unbinned contigs

Both `MetaBAT` and `MaxBin` have the option to output unbinned contigs after binning completes. We have not used that parameter here, but if you do choose to enable it you will end up with another *fastA* file in your output directory which you will need to avoid in the loops for creating `DAS_Tool` tables.

---

### Bin dereplication using *DAS_Tool* - Running the tool

We are now ready to run `DAS_Tool`. This can be done from the command line, as it does not take a particularly long time to run for this data set. With 2 threads, `DAS_Tool` should take 10 - 15 minutes to complete.

```bash
module load DAS_Tool/1.1.1-gimkl-2018b-R-3.6.1

DAS_Tool -i metabat_associations.txt,maxbin_associations.txt -l MetaBAT,MaxBin \
         -t 2 --write_bins 1 --search_engine blast \
         -c spades_assembly/spades_assembly.m1000.fna \
         -o dastool_out/
```

As usual, we will break down the parameters:

|Parameter|Function|
|:---|:---|
|**-i ...**|A comma-separated list of the contig/bin files we wish to process|
|**-l ...**|A comma-separated list of the binning tools used|
|**-t ...**|Number of threads to use|
|**--write_bins 1**|A 0 or 1 value telling `DAS_Tool` whether or not to write out a new set of bins<br>This is recommended, because `DAS_Tool` can create slices of old bins based on marker composition (see [the paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41564-018-0171-1) for details)|
|**--search_engine blast**|Specify whether to use `usearch`, `diamond`, or `BLAST` as the alignment tool for comparing gene sequences (see note below)|
|**-c ...**|Path to the assembly used in binning|
|**-o ..**|Output directory for all files|

When `DAS_Tool` runs, you might see a dump of text looking like

```bash
which: no diamond in (...)
/opt/nesi/CS400_centos7_bdw/DAS_Tool/1.1.1-gimkl-2018b-R-3.6.1/DAS_Tool: line 237: diamond: command not found

which: no usearch in (...)
/opt/nesi/CS400_centos7_bdw/DAS_Tool/1.1.1-gimkl-2018b-R-3.6.1/DAS_Tool: line 241: usearch: command not found
```

This is not a problem - `DAS_Tool` can use either `BLAST`, `diamond`, or `usearch` for performing its alignment operations. Regardless of which one you specify, it will search to see which ones are available. In this case, it is telling us that `diamond` and `usearch` cannot be found, which doesn't really matter because we have specified `BLAST` as our search engine.

When `DAS_Tool` has completed, we will have a final set of bins located in the folder path `dastool_out/_DASTool_bins`. Have a look at the output and see which bins made it to the final selection. Did a single binning tool pick the best bins, or are the results a split between `MetaBAT` and `MaxBin`?

---

### Evaluating bins using *CheckM*

Now that we have our dereplicated set of bins, it is a good idea to determine estimates of their completeness (how much of the genome was recovered) and contamination (how many contigs we believe have been incorrectly assigned to the bin). For organisms that lack a reference genome there is not **_definitive_** way to do this, but the tool `CheckM` provides a robust estimate for these statistics by searching each of your bins for a number of highly conserved, single copy genes. The number of markers depends on whether or not you are working with bacterial (120 markers) or archaeal (122 markers) genomes, but `CheckM` is able to determine which set is more appropriate for each of your bins as it runs.

There are several characteristics of the `CheckM` marker set worth noting:

##### Highly conserved, single copy markers

The marker sets used in `CheckM` were chosen because they are present in at least 95% of bacterial/archaeal genomes, and are single copy in ≥97% genomes tested. This means that if a gene is missing from a genome, it is likely due to incompleteness in either the original assembly or the binning approach. Simiarly, if a marker is observed more than once in a bin it is likely the result of over-clustering of the data.

##### Genes are considered as co-located clusters

Rather than test the raw presence/absence of genes in the marker sets, the genes are organised into operon-like structures where genes known to co-located are placed together. This is advantageous for two reasons

1. These co-located groups are distributed around the prokaryotic genome, so estimates are not biased by lucky/unlucky recovery of a gene hotspot
1. `CheckM` can account for how complete each individual gene cluster is, rather than just whether or not genes are present

##### Lineage-specific duplications and losses can be identified

As part of determining the correct marker set to use for each bin (bacterial or archaeal), `CheckM` uses a set of 43 conserved prokaryotic markers to insert each bin into a guide tree to estimate the phylogeny of the bin. There are several lineages which are known to have lost particular markers, or to have acquired a additional copies, and if `CheckM` places a bin into one of these lineages it can adjust its completeness/contamination estimates accordingly.

This process isn't perfect, however, and we will discuss some times when you might need to create your own marker set in the next session.

We will need to run `CheckM` under a slurm script. This is because the tree placement process requires a large amount of memory to perform, independently of the size of your data set. A basic script for submitting a `CheckM` job would be:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH -A xxxxxx
#SBATCH -J bin_eval_checkm
#SBATCH --time 2:00:00
#SBATCH --mem 100GB
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task 10
#SBATCH -e bin_eval_checkm.err
#SBATCH -o bin_eval_checkm.out

module load CheckM/1.0.13-gimkl-2018b-Python-2.7.16

cd 5.binning/

checkm lineage_wf -t 10 --pplacer_threads 10 \
                  -x fa --tab_table -f checkm.txt \
                  dastool_out/_DASTool_bins/ checkm_out/
```

The breakdown of parameters is as follows

|Parameter|Function|
|:---|:---|
|**lineage_wf**|Specifies with mode of `CheckM` to run. This is the most common to use, but several others exist|
|**-t ...**|Number of threads to use for the initial marker gene detection and clustering|
|**--pplacer_threads ...**|Number of threads to use when inserting bins into the guide tree<br>*Note: Increasing this parameter results in a linear increase in memory requirement - seting it to 10 means that `CheckM` will need about 10 times more memory than with a single thread*|
|**-x ...**|The *fastA* file extension to look for in the input folder. Default is *.fna*|
|**--tab_table**|If this parameter is present, a summary table will be written for the `CheckM` run|
|**-f ...**|The name of the file for the summary|
|**dastool/\_DASTool\_bins/**|The location of the bins to test|
|**checkm\_out/**|The location to write intermediate and output files|

When your job completes, we will download the summary file and examine it.

---

Commit message:

Added information for performing module purge

materials/day2/ex8_bin_dereplication.md, after:

# Bin dereplication

### Objectives

* Bin dereplication using `DAS_Tool` - Creating input tables
* Bin dereplication using `DAS_Tool` - Running the tool
* Evaluating bins using `CheckM`

---

### Bin dereplication using `DAS_Tool` - Creating input tables

As we discussed in the previous exercise, we have now generated two sets of bins from the same single assembly. With this mock data set we can see that each tool recovered 10 bins, which is the number of genomes used to create this mock community. Since we **_shouldn't_** see more than 10 bins total, these tools have obviously recovered the same genomes. However, it is not clear which tool has done a better job of recruiting contigs to each bin - we very rarely expect to see the complete genome recovered from these kinds of data, so while it is probably the case that while an equivalent bin is present in the `MetaBAT` and `MaxBin` outputs, they will likely be of differing quality.

`DAS_Tool` is a program designed to analyse the bins in each of our binning sets and determine where these equivalent pairs (or triplets if we use three binners) exist and return the 'best' one. `DAS_Tool` does not use the actual bins, but a set of text files that link contigs to their corresponding bins in each of the bin sets. We can produce these files using `bash`.

For this exercise, we will continue working in the `5.binning/` directory.

#### Creating contig/bin tables - *MetaBAT*

For each of our binning tools, we need to extract the contigs assigned to each bin and create a single file that reports these as

```bash
Contig[tab]Bin
```

This can be done with a bit of `bash` scripting. There's quite a bit going on here, so we'll provide the full command, and then a step-by-step explanation of what's happening.

```bash
cd 5.binning/

for bin_path in metabat/*.fa;
do
    bin_name=$(basename ${bin_path} .fa)

    grep ">" ${bin_path} | sed 's/>//g' | sed "s/$/\t${bin_name}/g" >> metabat_associations.txt
done
```

You can check the contents of this file using `less` or `head`, and you should be something like:

```bash
head -n5 metabat_associations.txt
# NODE_14_length_365935_cov_2.017800      metabat.10
# NODE_17_length_326226_cov_2.043974      metabat.10
# NODE_22_length_261683_cov_2.059748      metabat.10
# NODE_24_length_257182_cov_2.023572      metabat.10
# NODE_25_length_256074_cov_2.059912      metabat.10
```

We will now walk through the content of the command above, breaking apart each individual step.

```bash
for bin_path in metabat/*.fa;
do
```

This is the initial loop, returning each file in the `metabat/` folder that ends with the file extension *.fa*.

```bash
    bin_name=$(basename ${bin_path} .fa)
```

As we have previously seen, the `basename` command removes the path information from the input variable `bin_path` (i.e. - `metabat/metabat.1.fa` becomes `metabat.1.fa`) and assigns it to a new variable, `bin_name`. As an optional additional parameter, we can pass extra pieces of text to be removed from the variable, in this case the *.fa* extension.

```bash
    grep ">" ${bin_path} | sed 's/>//g' | sed "s/$/\t${bin_name}/g" >> metabat_associations.txt
    |                      |              |                         |
    |                      |              |                         Command 4
    |                      |              Command 3
    |                      Command 2
    Command 1
```

This next step uses piping between several commands to achieve the desired output.

###### Command 1

The `grep` command searches the input file `bin_path` for lines containing the `>` character, which is the *fastA* demarcation for a sequence name.

###### Command 2

The `sed` command replaces the `>` character with the empty character `''`, as we do not need this character in the final file.

###### Command 3

We now use `sed` again, this time to replace the `$` character. In many command line tools and software environments (including `R` and `python`) the characters `^` and `$` are used as shortcuts for the beginning and ending of a line, respectively. By using the character in this way, we are telling `sed` to replace the end-of-line with the text `\t${bin_name}`. `sed` will parse this text to mean the tab character followed by the content of the `bin_name` variable. The nature of `sed` is that it will automatically insert a new end-of-line.

###### Command 4

This is similar to the stdout redirection we have previously used, but the double use of the `>` character means that we are appending our text to the end of the file `metabat_associations.txt`. Because we are looping through several files in this exercise, if we were to use the single `>` character then on each new *fastA* file read, the content of `metabat_associations.txt` would be replaced.

It is important to note that because we are **_appending_** to the file, not **_replacing_** the contents, if you make a mistake in the command and need to re-run it, you will need to explicitly delete the `metabat_associations.txt` file using `rm`, otherwise your new (correct) output will be pasted to the end of your old (incorrect) output.

#### Creating contig/bin tables - *MaxBin*

The process for creating the `MaxBin` table is basically the same, we just need to change the file extension, as `MaxBin` writes outputs using the *.fasta* suffix rather than the *.fa* one.

```bash
for bin_path in maxbin/*.fasta;
do
    bin_name=$(basename ${bin_path} .fasta)
    grep ">" ${bin_path} | sed 's/>//g' | sed "s/$/\t${bin_name}/g" >> maxbin_associations.txt
done
```

##### Warning for unbinned contigs

Both `MetaBAT` and `MaxBin` have the option to output unbinned contigs after binning completes. We have not used that parameter here, but if you do choose to enable it you will end up with another *fastA* file in your output directory which you will need to avoid in the loops for creating `DAS_Tool` tables.

---

### Bin dereplication using *DAS_Tool* - Running the tool

We are now ready to run `DAS_Tool`. This can be done from the command line, as it does not take a particularly long time to run for this data set. Start by loading `DAS_Tool`.

```bash
module load DAS_Tool/1.1.1-gimkl-2018b-R-3.6.1
```

Depending on whether or not your session has been continued from previous exercises, you may encounter an error performing this module load. This is because some of the tools we have used in previous exercises have dependencies which conflict with the dependencies in `DAS_Tool`. If this is the case for you, you can unload all previous module loads with the following:

```bash
module purge

module load DAS_Tool/1.1.1-gimkl-2018b-R-3.6.1
```

`DAS_Tool` should now load without issue. With 2 threads, `DAS_Tool` should take 10 - 15 minutes to complete.

```bash
DAS_Tool -i metabat_associations.txt,maxbin_associations.txt -l MetaBAT,MaxBin \
         -t 2 --write_bins 1 --search_engine blast \
         -c spades_assembly/spades_assembly.m1000.fna \
         -o dastool_out/
```

As usual, we will break down the parameters:

|Parameter|Function|
|:---|:---|
|**-i ...**|A comma-separated list of the contig/bin files we wish to process|
|**-l ...**|A comma-separated list of the binning tools used|
|**-t ...**|Number of threads to use|
|**--write_bins 1**|A 0 or 1 value telling `DAS_Tool` whether or not to write out a new set of bins<br>This is recommended, because `DAS_Tool` can create slices of old bins based on marker composition (see [the paper](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41564-018-0171-1) for details)|
|**--search_engine blast**|Specify whether to use `usearch`, `diamond`, or `BLAST` as the alignment tool for comparing gene sequences (see note below)|
|**-c ...**|Path to the assembly used in binning|
|**-o ..**|Output directory for all files|

When `DAS_Tool` runs, you might see a dump of text looking like

```bash
which: no diamond in (...)
/opt/nesi/CS400_centos7_bdw/DAS_Tool/1.1.1-gimkl-2018b-R-3.6.1/DAS_Tool: line 237: diamond: command not found

which: no usearch in (...)
/opt/nesi/CS400_centos7_bdw/DAS_Tool/1.1.1-gimkl-2018b-R-3.6.1/DAS_Tool: line 241: usearch: command not found
```

This is not a problem - `DAS_Tool` can use either `BLAST`, `diamond`, or `usearch` for performing its alignment operations. Regardless of which one you specify, it will search to see which ones are available. In this case, it is telling us that `diamond` and `usearch` cannot be found, which doesn't really matter because we have specified `BLAST` as our search engine.

When `DAS_Tool` has completed, we will have a final set of bins located in the folder path `dastool_out/_DASTool_bins`. Have a look at the output and see which bins made it to the final selection. Did a single binning tool pick the best bins, or are the results a split between `MetaBAT` and `MaxBin`?

---

### Evaluating bins using *CheckM*

Now that we have our dereplicated set of bins, it is a good idea to determine estimates of their completeness (how much of the genome was recovered) and contamination (how many contigs we believe have been incorrectly assigned to the bin). For organisms that lack a reference genome there is not **_definitive_** way to do this, but the tool `CheckM` provides a robust estimate for these statistics by searching each of your bins for a number of highly conserved, single copy genes. The number of markers depends on whether or not you are working with bacterial (120 markers) or archaeal (122 markers) genomes, but `CheckM` is able to determine which set is more appropriate for each of your bins as it runs.

There are several characteristics of the `CheckM` marker set worth noting:

##### Highly conserved, single copy markers

The marker sets used in `CheckM` were chosen because they are present in at least 95% of bacterial/archaeal genomes, and are single copy in ≥97% genomes tested. This means that if a gene is missing from a genome, it is likely due to incompleteness in either the original assembly or the binning approach. Simiarly, if a marker is observed more than once in a bin it is likely the result of over-clustering of the data.

##### Genes are considered as co-located clusters

Rather than test the raw presence/absence of genes in the marker sets, the genes are organised into operon-like structures where genes known to co-located are placed together. This is advantageous for two reasons

1. These co-located groups are distributed around the prokaryotic genome, so estimates are not biased by lucky/unlucky recovery of a gene hotspot
1. `CheckM` can account for how complete each individual gene cluster is, rather than just whether or not genes are present

##### Lineage-specific duplications and losses can be identified

As part of determining the correct marker set to use for each bin (bacterial or archaeal), `CheckM` uses a set of 43 conserved prokaryotic markers to insert each bin into a guide tree to estimate the phylogeny of the bin. There are several lineages which are known to have lost particular markers, or to have acquired a additional copies, and if `CheckM` places a bin into one of these lineages it can adjust its completeness/contamination estimates accordingly.

This process isn't perfect, however, and we will discuss some times when you might need to create your own marker set in the next session.

We will need to run `CheckM` under a slurm script. This is because the tree placement process requires a large amount of memory to perform, independently of the size of your data set. A basic script for submitting a `CheckM` job would be:

```bash
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH -A xxxxxx
#SBATCH -J bin_eval_checkm
#SBATCH --time 2:00:00
#SBATCH --mem 100GB
#SBATCH --cpus-per-task 10
#SBATCH -e bin_eval_checkm.err
#SBATCH -o bin_eval_checkm.out

module load CheckM/1.0.13-gimkl-2018b-Python-2.7.16

cd 5.binning/

checkm lineage_wf -t 10 --pplacer_threads 10 -x fa \
                  --tab_table -f checkm.txt \
                  dastool_out/_DASTool_bins/ checkm_out/
```

The breakdown of parameters is as follows

|Parameter|Function|
|:---|:---|
|**lineage_wf**|Specifies with mode of `CheckM` to run. This is the most common to use, but several others exist|
|**-t ...**|Number of threads to use for the initial marker gene detection and clustering|
|**--pplacer_threads ...**|Number of threads to use when inserting bins into the guide tree<br>*Note: Increasing this parameter results in a linear increase in memory requirement - seting it to 10 means that `CheckM` will need about 10 times more memory than with a single thread*|
|**-x ...**|The *fastA* file extension to look for in the input folder. Default is *.fna*|
|**--tab_table**|If this parameter is present, a summary table will be written for the `CheckM` run|
|**-f ...**|The name of the file for the summary|
|**dastool/\_DASTool\_bins/**|The location of the bins to test|
|**checkm\_out/**|The location to write intermediate and output files|

When your job completes, we will download the summary file and examine it.

---
