# Identifying viral contigs in metagenomic data

!!! info "Objectives"

    * [Identifying viral contigs](#identifying-viral-contigs)
    * [Identifying viral contigs using `VirSorter2`](#identifying-viral-contigs-using-virsorter2)

## Identifying viral contigs

Viral metagenomics is a rapidly progressing field, and new software are constantly being developed and released each year that aim to better identify and characterise viral genomic sequences from assembled metagenomic sequence reads. 

Currently, the most commonly used methods are [`VirSorter2`](https://microbiomejournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40168-020-00990-y), [`VIBRANT`](https://microbiomejournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40168-020-00867-0), and [`VirFinder`](https://link.springer.com/epdf/10.1186/s40168-017-0283-5?author_access_token=YQgkTWibFIFPtRICkTjZF2_BpE1tBhCbnbw3BuzI2RMCpVMGldKV8DA9scozc7Z-db3ufPFz9-pswHsYVHyEsCrziBuECllLPOgZ6ANHsMeKF5KejrdDKdeASyDkxB5wfFDq523QSd01cnqxCLqCiQ%3D%3D) (or the machine learning implementation of this, [`DeepVirFinder`](https://github.com/jessieren/DeepVirFinder)). A number of recent studies use one of these tools or a combination of several at once.

!!! info ""

    === "`VirSorter2`"

        Uses a predicted protein homology reference database-based approach, together with searching for a number of pre-defined metrics based on known viral genomic features. `VirSorter2` includes dsDNAphage, ssDNA, and RNA viruses, and the viral groups Nucleocytoviricota and lavidaviridae.* 

        **More info** 

        - [VirSorter2 GitHub](https://github.com/jiarong/VirSorter2)
        - [Guo *et al.* (2021) VirSorter2: a multi-classifier, expert-guided approach to detect diverse DNA and RNA viruses](https://microbiomejournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40168-020-00990-y)

    === "`VIBRANT`"

        Uses a machine learning approach based on protein similarity (non-reference-based similarity searches with multiple HMM sets), and is in principle applicable to bacterial and archaeal DNA and RNA viruses, integrated proviruses (which are excised from contigs by `VIBRANT`), and eukaryotic viruses. 

        **More info** 
        
        - [VIBRANT GitHub](https://github.com/AnantharamanLab/VIBRANT)
        - [Kieft, Zhou, and Anantharaman (2020) VIBRANT: automated recovery, annotation and curation of microbial viruses, and evaluation of viral community function from genomic sequences](https://microbiomejournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40168-020-00867-0)

    === "`DeepVirFinder`"

        Uses a machine learning based approach based on *k*-mer frequencies. Having developed a database of the differences in *k*-mer frequencies between prokaryote and viral genomes, *VirFinder* examines assembled contigs and identifies whether their *k*-mer frequencies are comparable to known viruses in the database, using this to predict viral genomic sequence. This method has some limitations based on the viruses that were included when building the database (bacterial DNA viruses, but very few archaeal viruses, and, at least in some versions of the software, no eukaryotic viruses). However, tools are also provided to build your own database should you wish to develop an expanded one. Due to its distinctive *k*-mer frequency-based approach, *VirFinder* may also have the capability of identifying some novel viruses overlooked by tools such as *VIBRANT* or *VirSorter*.

        **More info** 

        - [DeepVirFinder GitHub](https://github.com/jessieren/DeepVirFinder)


---

## Identifying viral contigs using `VirSorter2`

For this exercise, we will use `VirSorter2` to identify viral contigs from our assembled contigs. We can also use `VirSorter2` to prepare files for later use with the gene annotation tool `DRAM-v`, which we'll run later in the day.

## Checking quality and estimate completeness of the viral contigs via `CheckV`

[`CheckV`](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.05.06.081778v1.abstract) was developed as an analogue to `CheckM`. `CheckV` first performs a 'contaminating sequence' trim, removing any retained (prokaryote) host sequence on the end of contigs with integrated prophage, and then assesses the quality and completeness of the assembled viral contigs. The quality of the contigs are also categoriesed based on the recently developed [Minimum Information about an Unclutivated Virus Genome](https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.4306) (MIUViG) standards for reporting sequences of unclutivated virus geneomes (such as those recovered from metagenomic sequencing data). The MIUViG were developed as an extension of the [Minimum Information about any (x) Sequence](https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.1823) ([MIxS](https://gensc.org/mixs/)) standards, which include, among others, standards for Metagenome-Assembled Genomes (MIMAG).


### Run `VirSorter2` and `CheckV`

These exercises will take place in the `7.viruses/` folder.

!!! terminal-2 "Navigate to working directory"

    ```bash
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses/
    ```

For `VirSorter2`, we will input the assembled contigs from the `SPAdes` assembly we performed earlier. These assembly files have been copied to `7.viruses/spades_assembly/` for this exercise.

We will then run `CheckV` in the same script, providing the FASTA file of viral contigs output by `VirSorter2` as input (`final-viral-combined.fa`).

!!! terminal-2 "Create a script named `VirSorter2_and_checkv.sl`"

    ```bash
    nano VirSorter2_and_checkv.sl
    ```

!!! warning "Remember to update `<YOUR FOLDER>` to your own folder."

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash linenums="1"
    #!/bin/bash -e
    #SBATCH --account       nesi02659
    #SBATCH --job-name      VirSorter2_and_checkv
    #SBATCH --partition     milan
    #SBATCH --time          05:00:00
    #SBATCH --mem           2GB
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task 28
    #SBATCH --error         %x_%j.err
    #SBATCH --output        %x_%j.out

    # Working directory
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses/
    
    # VirSorter2
    ## Load modules
    module purge
    module unload XALT
    module load VirSorter/2.2.3-gimkl-2020a-Python-3.8.2

    ## Output directory
    mkdir -p VirSorter2

    ## Run VirSorter2
    virsorter run -j $SLURM_CPUS_PER_TASK \
      -i spades_assembly/spades_assembly.m1000.fna \
      -d /nesi/project/nesi02659/MGSS_2024/resources/databases/virsorter2_20210909 \
      --min-score 0.7 --include-groups dsDNAphage,NCLDV,RNA,ssDNA,lavidaviridae \
      --prep-for-dramv \
      -l mgss -w VirSorter2 \
      --tmpdir ${SLURM_JOB_ID}.tmp --rm-tmpdir \
      all \
      --config LOCAL_SCRATCH=${TMPDIR:-/tmp}

    # CheckV
    ## Load module
    module purge
    module load CheckV/1.0.1-gimkl-2022a-Python-3.10.5
    
    ## Output directory
    mkdir -p checkv_out
    
    ## Run CheckV
    checkv end_to_end VirSorter2/mgss-final-viral-combined.fa checkv_out/ -t $SLURM_CPUS_PER_TASK
    ```

!!! warning "`module unload XALT`"

    For the `VirSorter/2.2.3-gimkl-2020a-Python-3.8.2` NeSI module to work properly, **we must also include `module unload XALT`** in the script above.

!!! tip "`VirSorter2` parameters"

    The key parameters you may want to consider altering for your own work are `--min-score` and `--include-groups`. For today's excersice we will include all available groups (`--include-groups dsDNAphage,NCLDV,RNA,ssDNA,lavidaviridae`), and will set the min-score to 0.7. You can experiment with this value for your own data (see the [Virsorter2 github page](https://github.com/jiarong/VirSorter2) for more information).

!!! terminal-2 "Submit the script as a slurm job"

    ```bash
    sbatch VirSorter2_and_checkv.sl
    ```

!!! note "`VirSorter2` for your own work"

    The required databases for `VirSorter2` are not loaded with the NeSI module. For your own work, you will need to first download these databases and provide the path to the `-d` flag. For today's workshop this is already set up.


