# APPENDIX (ex11): Normalise per-sample coverage values by average library size (example)

Having generated per-sample coverage values, it is usually necessary to also normalise these values across samples of differing sequencing depth. Commonly, this is done by normalising to minimum or average library size alone. 

In this case, the mock metagenome data we have been working with are already of equal depth, and so this is an unnecessary step for the purposes of this workshop. The steps below are provided for future reference as an example of one way in which the `cov_table.txt` output generated by `jgi_summarize_bam_contig_depths` above could then be normalised based on average library size. 

#### Normalise to average read depth via the *python* script `norm_jgi_cov_table.py`

The script `norm_jgi_cov_table.py` is available in the folder `10.gene_annotation_and_coverage/`, and is also available for download for future reference at [this link](../scripts/norm_jgi_cov_table.py). 

!!! note "Note"
    This script was developed as a simple example for this workshop. It has not yet been widely tested: it is recommended in early usage to manually check a few values to ensure the conversions in the output file are as expected.

In brief, this `python` script leverages the fact that the standard error output from `bowtie2` includes read counts for each sample. This has been saved in `mapping_filtered_bins_<ADD JOB ID>.err`, as per the slurm script that was submitted for the read mapping step. Note that, since we know the order that `bowtie2` processed the samples (based on the loop we provided to `bowtie2`: `for i in sample1 sample2 sample3 sample4`), we know that the read count lines in the output error file will appear in the same order. We can therefore iterate through each of these lines, extracting the individual sample read count each time. These values are then used to calculate the average read depth for all samples. Coverage values (in each of the `*.bam` columns) are normalised for each sample based on: `(coverage / sample_read_depth) * average_read_depth`. Finally, this is saved to the new file with the prefix 'normalised_' (e.g. `normalised_bins_cov_table.txt`).

!!! note "Note"
    In your own work, if you alternatively chose to use `BBMap` (and `BBMap`s `covstats` output) for the previous coverage calculation step, read counts can similarly be extracted from the `scafstats` output by searching for the line "Reads Used: ...".

`norm_jgi_cov_table.py` requires two input arguments, and takes an additional optional output path argument.

!!! abstract ""
    * `-c`: Coverage table generated by `jgi_summarize_bam_contig_depths`
    * `-e`: Standard error file created by read mapping via `bowtie2`
    * `-o`: (Optional) Path to output directory (must already exist) (default is the current directory).

Run `norm_jgi_cov_table.py` for microbial bins data and viral contigs, inputting:

* A. the `bins_cov_table.txt` and `mapping_filtered_bins_<ADD JOB ID>.err` files
* B. the `viruses_cov_table.txt` and `mapping_viruses_<ADD JOB ID>.err` files. 

This will generate the outputs `normalised_bins_cov_table.txt` and `normalised_viruses_cov_table.txt`. 

!!! note "Note"
    If this `python` script is in the directory you are currently in, you can call it simply by adding `./` in front of the script name. If you have saved the script elsewhere, you will need to add the absolute path to the script, or add the script to your bin path.*

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash
    module purge
    module load Python/3.8.2-gimkl-2020a
    
    ./norm_jgi_cov_table.py -c bins_cov_table.txt -e mapping_filtered_bins_<ADD JOB ID>.err
    ./norm_jgi_cov_table.py -c viruses_cov_table.txt -e mapping_filtered_viruses_<ADD JOB ID>.err
    ```

---

### What if I only have BAM files?
You can still normalise your data even with BAM files alone. But this will involve an additional step of obtaining library size/read depth information from the BAM files using `SAMtools`.

#### 1. Obtain library size information
We can extract this based on the output from `SAMtools` `flagstat` command.

```bash
module purge
module load SAMtools/1.15.1-GCC-11.3.0

for i in bin_coverage/*.bam; do
  filename=$(basename $i)
  libsize=$(($(samtools flagstat $i | head -n 1 | cut -f 1 -d ' ')/2))
  printf "%s\t%d\n" $filename $libsize >> libsize.txt
done
```

Most of the commands in the above code block should be familiar to you. Here, we use a loop to go through all the BAM files (mapping outputs from `bowtie2`). Something that might be new here is `$(($(samtools flagstat sample1.bam | head -n 1 | cut -f 1 -d ' ')/2))`. Let's go through the code chunk by chunk, starting inside and moving our way outwards:

- `samtools flagstat $i`: This calls the flagstat subcommand which provides some stats about our mapping.If you were to run it on sample1.bam, the results would look like the following (notice in the first line that the first number is double that of read 1 or read 2):
```bash
1099984 + 0 in total (QC-passed reads + QC-failed reads)
1099984 + 0 primary
0 + 0 secondary
0 + 0 supplementary
0 + 0 duplicates
0 + 0 primary duplicates
1002053 + 0 mapped (91.10% : N/A)
1002053 + 0 primary mapped (91.10% : N/A)
1099984 + 0 paired in sequencing
549992 + 0 read1
549992 + 0 read2
549784 + 0 properly paired (49.98% : N/A)
998676 + 0 with itself and mate mapped
3377 + 0 singletons (0.31% : N/A)
6466 + 0 with mate mapped to a different chr
6267 + 0 with mate mapped to a different chr (mapQ>=5)
``` 
- `head -n 1`: We only want the first line of this output.
- `cut -f 1 -d ' '`: We only want the first column (first number) in the line that is space delimited.
- `$(( ))`: Anything encased in these double round brackets will be parsed arithmetically. If you were to do `echo $((1+2))`, it will print `3`. Here, we want to perform a division based on the outputs of`samtools flagstat ...` (notice the `/2` at the end).

Altogether, we generate, for each BAM file, the output of flagstat, take the first number and divide it by 2. This is our library size (written out to a file as `libsize.txt`). 

#### 2. Normalise and scale contig coverage
We then use the coverage table and library size files as inputs for a custom R script (you can also find it [here]()). We can call this script via the command line like so:

```bash
module purge
module load R/4.2.1-gimkl-2022a

./normalise_jgi_cov.r bins_cov_table.txt libsize.txt
```

This script will generate an output in the current directory with the `normalised_` prefix before the coverage table file name. It will also inform you if there are unequal or unmatched sample names.

