docs/resources/4_APPENDIX_ex11_viral_taxonomy_prediction_via_vContact2.md, before:

# APPENDIX (ex11) : Viral taxonomy prediction via *vContact2*

## 1. Predict genes via `prodigal`

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash
    # Navigate to working directory
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses

    # Create output directory
    mkdir -p viral_taxonomy

    # Create combined nucleotide sequence file
    cat checkv_out/*.fna > checkv_combined.fna
    ```

Example slurm script:

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash linenums="1"
    #!/bin/bash -e

    #SBATCH --account       nesi02659
    #SBATCH --job-name      prodigal
    #SBATCH --partition     milan
    #SBATCH --time          00:05:00
    #SBATCH --mem           1GB
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task 2
    #SBATCH --error         %x_%j.err
    #SBATCH --output        %x_%j.out


    # Load dependencies
    module purge
    module load prodigal/2.6.3-GCC-11.3.0

    # Set up working directories
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses

    # Run Prodigal to predict genes 
    prodigal -p meta -q \
             -i checkv_combined.fna \
             -a viral_taxonomy/checkv_combined.faa 
    ```

## 2. Generate required mapping file for `vContact2`

Use `vContact2`'s `vcontact2_gene2genome` script to generate the required mapping file from the output of `prodigal`.

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash
    # Ensure you are in the correct working directory
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses
    
    # Load modules
    module purge
    module unload XALT
    module load Singularity/3.10.3 DIAMOND/2.0.15-GCC-11.3.0 MCL/14.137-gimkl-2020a
    
    # Bind path to Singularity container
    export SINGULARITY_BIND="$PWD"
    container=/opt/nesi/containers/vContact2
    
    # Run script
    singularity run $container/vcontact2.simg \
    vcontact2_gene2genome --proteins viral_taxonomy/checkv_combined.faa \
                          --output viral_taxonomy/viral_genomes_g2g.csv \
                          -s 'Prodigal-FAA'
    ```

## 3. Run `vContact2`

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash linenums="1"
    #!/bin/bash -e
    
    #SBATCH --account       nesi02659
    #SBATCH --job-name      vConTACT2
    #SBATCH --partition     milan
    #SBATCH --time          02:00:00
    #SBATCH --mem           20GB
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task 16
    #SBATCH --error         %x_%j.err
    #SBATCH --output        %x_%j.out
    
    # Working directory
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses

    # Load modules
    module purge
    module unload XALT
    module load Singularity/3.10.3 MCL/14.137-gimkl-2020a DIAMOND/2.0.15-GCC-11.3.0

    # Bind paths
    export SINGULARITY_BIND="$PWD"
    container=/opt/nesi/containers/vContact2

    # Run vConTACT2
    singularity run $container/vcontact2.simg \
    vcontact2 --raw-proteins viral_taxonomy/checkv_combined.faa \
              --rel-mode Diamond \
              --threads $SLURM_CPUS_PER_TASK \
              --proteins-fp viral_taxonomy/viral_genomes_g2g.csv \
              --db 'ProkaryoticViralRefSeq201-Merged' \
              --c1-bin /opt/conda/bin/cluster_one-1.0.jar \
              --output-dir vConTACT2_Results
    ```

## 4. Predict taxonomy of viral contigs based on output of `vContact2`

`vContact2` doesn't actually *assign* taxonomy to your input viral contigs. It instead provides an output outlining which reference viral genomes your viral contigs clustered with (if they clustered with any at all). Based on how closely they clustered with any reference genome(s), you can then use this to *predict* the likely taxonomy of the contig. 

From the `vContact2` online docs:

!!! quote ""

    One important note is that the taxonomic information is not included for user sequences. This means that each user will need to find their genome(s) of interest and check to see if reference genomes are located in the same VC. If the user genome is within the same VC sub-cluster as a reference genome, then there's a very high probability that the user genome is part of the same genus. If the user genome is in the same VC but not the same sub-cluster as a reference, then it's highly likely the two genomes are related at roughly genus-subfamily level. If there are no reference genomes in the same VC or VC sub-cluster, then it's likely that they are not related at the genus level at all.

The summary output of `vContact2` is the file `vConTACT2_Results/genome_by_genome_overview.csv`. As the comment above notes, one approach would be to search this file for particular contigs of interest, and see if any reference genomes fall into the same viral cluster (VC), using this reference to predict the taxonomy of the contig of interest.

The following `python` script is effectively an automated version of this for all input contigs (*Note: this script has not been widely tested, and so should be used with some degree of caution*). This script groups together contigs (and reference genomes) that fall into each VC, and then for each, outputs a list of all taxonomies (at the ranks of 'Order', 'Family', and 'Genus', separately) that were found in that cluster. The predictions (i.e. the list of all taxonomies found in the same VC) for each rank and each contig is output to the table `tax_predict_table.txt`. 

!!! note "Note"

    The taxonomies are deliberately enclosed in square brackets (`[ ]`) to highlight the fact that these are **predictions**, rather than definitive taxonomy **assignments**.

For future reference, a copy of this script is available for download [here](../scripts/vcontact2_tax_predict.py)

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash
    module purge
    module load Python/3.8.2-gimkl-2020a
    
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses/
    
    ./vcontact2_tax_predict.py \
    -i viral_taxonomy/vConTACT2_Results/genome_by_genome_overview.csv \
    -o viral_taxonomy/
    ```

---

Commit message:

Update tax_predict.py script for later version of vConTACT2

docs/resources/4_APPENDIX_ex11_viral_taxonomy_prediction_via_vContact2.md, after:

# APPENDIX (ex11) : Viral taxonomy prediction via *vContact2*

## 1. Predict genes via `prodigal`

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash
    # Navigate to working directory
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses

    # Create output directory
    mkdir -p viral_taxonomy

    # Create combined nucleotide sequence file
    cat checkv_out/*.fna > checkv_combined.fna
    ```

Example slurm script:

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash linenums="1"
    #!/bin/bash -e

    #SBATCH --account       nesi02659
    #SBATCH --job-name      prodigal
    #SBATCH --partition     milan
    #SBATCH --time          00:05:00
    #SBATCH --mem           1GB
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task 2
    #SBATCH --error         %x_%j.err
    #SBATCH --output        %x_%j.out


    # Load dependencies
    module purge
    module load prodigal/2.6.3-GCC-11.3.0

    # Set up working directories
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses

    # Run Prodigal to predict genes 
    prodigal -p meta -q \
             -i checkv_combined.fna \
             -a viral_taxonomy/checkv_combined.faa 
    ```

## 2. Generate required mapping file for `vContact2`

Use `vContact2`'s `vcontact2_gene2genome` script to generate the required mapping file from the output of `prodigal`.

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash
    # Ensure you are in the correct working directory
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses
    
    # Load modules
    module purge
    module unload XALT
    module load Singularity/3.10.3 DIAMOND/2.0.15-GCC-11.3.0 MCL/14.137-gimkl-2020a
    
    # Bind path to Singularity container
    export SINGULARITY_BIND="$PWD"
    container=/opt/nesi/containers/vContact2
    
    # Run script
    singularity run $container/vcontact2.simg \
    vcontact2_gene2genome --proteins viral_taxonomy/checkv_combined.faa \
                          --output viral_taxonomy/viral_genomes_g2g.csv \
                          -s 'Prodigal-FAA'
    ```

## 3. Run `vContact2`

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash linenums="1"
    #!/bin/bash -e
    
    #SBATCH --account       nesi02659
    #SBATCH --job-name      vConTACT2
    #SBATCH --partition     milan
    #SBATCH --time          02:00:00
    #SBATCH --mem           20GB
    #SBATCH --cpus-per-task 16
    #SBATCH --error         %x_%j.err
    #SBATCH --output        %x_%j.out
    
    # Working directory
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses

    # Load modules
    module purge
    module unload XALT
    module load Singularity/3.10.3 MCL/14.137-gimkl-2020a DIAMOND/2.0.15-GCC-11.3.0

    # Bind paths
    export SINGULARITY_BIND="$PWD"
    container=/opt/nesi/containers/vContact2

    # Run vConTACT2
    singularity run $container/vcontact2.simg \
    vcontact2 --raw-proteins viral_taxonomy/checkv_combined.faa \
              --rel-mode Diamond \
              --threads $SLURM_CPUS_PER_TASK \
              --proteins-fp viral_taxonomy/viral_genomes_g2g.csv \
              --db 'ProkaryoticViralRefSeq201-Merged' \
              --c1-bin /opt/conda/bin/cluster_one-1.0.jar \
              --output-dir vConTACT2_Results
    ```

## 4. Predict taxonomy of viral contigs based on output of `vContact2`

`vContact2` doesn't actually *assign* taxonomy to your input viral contigs. It instead provides an output outlining which reference viral genomes your viral contigs clustered with (if they clustered with any at all). Based on how closely they clustered with any reference genome(s), you can then use this to *predict* the likely taxonomy of the contig. 

From the `vContact2` online docs:

!!! quote ""

    One important note is that the taxonomic information is not included for user sequences. This means that each user will need to find their genome(s) of interest and check to see if reference genomes are located in the same VC. If the user genome is within the same VC sub-cluster as a reference genome, then there's a very high probability that the user genome is part of the same genus. If the user genome is in the same VC but not the same sub-cluster as a reference, then it's highly likely the two genomes are related at roughly genus-subfamily level. If there are no reference genomes in the same VC or VC sub-cluster, then it's likely that they are not related at the genus level at all.

The summary output of `vContact2` is the file `vConTACT2_Results/genome_by_genome_overview.csv`. As the comment above notes, one approach would be to search this file for particular contigs of interest, and see if any reference genomes fall into the same viral cluster (VC), using this reference to predict the taxonomy of the contig of interest.

The following `python` script is effectively an automated version of this for all input contigs (*Note: this script has not been widely tested, and so should be used with some degree of caution*). This script groups together contigs (and reference genomes) that fall into each VC, and then for each, outputs a list of all taxonomies (at the ranks of 'Order', 'Family', and 'Genus', separately) that were found in that cluster. The predictions (i.e. the list of all taxonomies found in the same VC) for each rank and each contig is output to the table `tax_predict_table.txt`. 

!!! note "Note"

    The taxonomies are deliberately enclosed in square brackets (`[ ]`) to highlight the fact that these are **predictions**, rather than definitive taxonomy **assignments**.

For future reference, a copy of this script is available for download [here](../scripts/tax_predict_vConTACT2_0.9.19.py)

!!! note "Note"

    This script was written for vConTACT2_0.9.19 and vConTACT2_0.11.3, and has not been tested with later versions. A comparable script for earlier versions of vConTACT2 is available [here](../scripts/vcontact2_tax_predict.py).

!!! terminal "code"

    ```bash
    module purge
    module load Python/3.8.2-gimkl-2020a
    
    cd /nesi/nobackup/nesi02659/MGSS_U/<YOUR FOLDER>/7.viruses/
    
    ./tax_predict_vConTACT2_0.9.19.py \
    -i viral_taxonomy/vConTACT2_Results/genome_by_genome_overview.csv \
    -o viral_taxonomy/
    ```

---
